    O                     = require 'omicron'
    state                 = require './state-function'
    State                 = require './state'
    StateExpression       = null
    Transition            = null
    TransitionExpression  = null

    module.exports =



## [RootState](#root-state)

A **root state** is the top-level `State` which holds the authoritative
reference to the **owner**’s `current` state, and which governs the proceeding
of **transitions** that traverse its **state tree**.

    class RootState extends State

      { rxTransitionArrow, transitionArrowMethods } = state
      { env, hasOwn, trim, type, isEmpty, isArray } = O
      { slice } = Array::

      { VIRTUAL, ABSTRACT, CONCLUSIVE, FINAL, RETAINED } = this
      { VIA_NONE, VIA_PROTO } = this


### [Constructor](#root-state--constructor)

Creates a working **state tree** based on a single **root state** as directed
by an `expression`, and implements this tree as a behavior model for the
provided `owner`.

###### PARAMETERS

* `owner` : object

* `expression` : `StateExpression` | object — A plain object will be coerced
  and interpreted if necessary into a formal `StateExpression`.

* `accessorName` : string — The property name on `owner` at which the
  generated **accessor** function will appear. Defaults to `'state'`.

* `initialState` : string — A state name or path. If present, supersedes the
  `initial` attribute of substates or inherited protostates.

###### DISCUSSION

Direct construction via `new` is for internal use only; the `State` object
model is properly created by defining `StateExpression`s that are provided to
the exported `state` function.

###### SOURCE

      constructor: ( owner = {}, expression, accessorName, initialState ) ->

Assign to `owner` an **accessor** to its state implementation.

        @accessorName = accessorName ?= 'state'
        owner[ accessorName ] = createAccessor owner, accessorName, this

A root state’s `name` by definition is the empty-string.

        super owner, '', expression

Determine the initial state, and set the `current` state to that.

        current = ( if initialState? then @query initialState else
          @initialSubstate() ) ? this

The initial state may be `abstract`, in which case the `current` reference must
snap to the abstract state’s default `concrete` substate.

        if current.attributes & ABSTRACT
          current = current.defaultSubstate() ? current

The previous redirections may have left `current` pointing to a protostate, in
which case a virtual state must be created in `this` root’s tree.

        current = current.virtualize this if current.root isnt this

With `current` now resolved, the authoritative reference to it is held here.

        @_current = current

While a `Transition` is underway, `_current` will be a reference to that
transition. To further distinguish this condition, an identical reference is
also held at `_transition`.

        @_transition = null



### [Private functions](#root-state--private)


#### [createAccessor](#root-state--private--create-accessor)

Returns the `accessor` function that will serve as an owner object’s interface
to its state implementation.

      createAccessor = ( owner, name, root ) ->

        accessor = ( input, args... ) ->
          current = root._current or root

          if this is owner
            return current unless input?
            return current.change input.call this if typeof input is 'function'
            if typeof input is 'string' and
                ( match = input.match rxTransitionArrow ) and
                  method = transitionArrowMethods[ match[1] ]
              return if args.length
              then current[ method ].apply current, [ match[2] ].concat args
              else current[ method ] match[2]
            return current.query.apply current, arguments

Calling the accessor of a prototype means that `this` requires its own accessor
and root state. Creating a new `RootState` will have the desired side-effect of
also creating the object’s new accessor, to which the call is then forwarded.

          else if ( owner.isPrototypeOf this ) and
              ( ( not hasOwn.call this, name ) or @[ name ] is owner[ name ] )
            new RootState this, null, name, current.path()
            return @[ name ].apply this, arguments

        accessor.isAccessor = true

        if env.debug
          accessor.toString = ->
            "[accessor] -> #{ root._current.path() }"

        accessor



### [Methods](#root-state--methods)


#### [getTransitionExpression](#root-state--prototype--get-transition-expression)

Finds the appropriate transition expression for the given `target` and `origin`
states. If no matching transitions are defined in either state or any of their
ancestors, a generic actionless transition expression for the pair is returned.

###### PARAMETERS

* `target` : `State`
* `origin` : `State` (optional) — defaults to the `current` state.

###### SOURCE

      getTransitionExpression: do ->

        search = ( target, origin, subject, ceiling ) ->
          while subject? and subject isnt ceiling
            for own name, expr of subject._?.transitions when expr?
              { guards } = expr
              { admit, release } = guards if guards?

              disallowedByGuard =
                ( not admit?.evaluate target, origin ) or
                ( not release?.evaluate origin, target )

              targetMatches =
                if expr.target
                then subject.query expr.target, target
                else subject is target

              originMatches =
                not expr.origin or subject.query expr.origin, origin

              if targetMatches and originMatches and not disallowedByGuard
                return expr

            break unless ceiling?
            subject = subject.superstate

        ( target, origin = @_current ) ->
          ( search target, origin, target ) or
          ( search target, origin, origin unless origin is target ) or
          ( search target, origin, target.superstate, @root ) or
          ( search target, origin, @root ) or
          ( unless target.isIn origin
            search target, origin, origin.superstate, origin.common target ) or
          new TransitionExpression


#### [change](#root-state--prototype--change)

Attempts to execute a state **transition**.

###### SYNOPSIS

A `change`/`go`/`be` operation conducts asynchronous transitions, generation of
relevant transitional **events**, and construction of any necessary temporary
**virtual states** for prototypal inheritors.

Rules imposed by all **guards** held on both the origin and `target` states are
respected, and if these are not satisfied the transition will be denied.

###### PARAMETERS

The `target` parameter may be either a `State` object within the tree of this
`RootState`, or a string that resolves to a likewise targetable `State` when
evaluated from the context of the most recently current state.

The `options` parameter is an optional map that may include:

  * `args` : array — arguments to be passed to a transition’s `action`.
  * `success` : function — invoked if the transition attempt succeeds.
  * `failure` : function — invoked if the transition attempt fails.

###### SOURCE

      change: ( target, options ) ->
        { root, owner } = this
        current = @_current
        transition = @_transition

The `origin` is defined as the controller’s most recently current state that is
not a `Transition`.

        origin = transition?.origin or current

Departures are not allowed from a state that is `final`.

        return null if origin.attributes & FINAL

Ensure that `target` is a valid `State`.

        unless target instanceof State
          target = if target then origin.query target else root
        return null unless target
        targetOwner = target.owner
        return null if owner isnt targetOwner and
          not targetOwner.isPrototypeOf owner

Extract `args` from `options` and resolve `options` to an object if necessary.

        if options?
          args = if ( isArray options ) or ( type options ) is 'arguments'
          then options
          else options.args
          args = slice.call args if args?

If `target` is a `retained` state, restore its currency by redirecting to its
retained internal substate.

        if target.attributes & RETAINED
          target = retainee if retainee = target.query target._.retaineePath

A transition cannot target an abstract state directly, so `target` must be
reassigned to the appropriate concrete substate.

        while target.attributes & ABSTRACT
          return null unless target = target.defaultSubstate()

If any guards are in place for the given `origin` and `target`, both of those
states must consent to the transition.

        unless options?.forced
          released = origin.evaluateGuards 'release', target
          admitted = target.evaluateGuards 'admit', origin
          unless released and admitted
            options?.failure?.call? this
            return null

If `target` is a protostate, then the protostate must be virtualized locally
and `target` must be reassigned to the new virtual state.

        target = target.virtualize this unless target?.root is root

A reference is held to the previously current state, or abortive transition.

        source = current

The upcoming transition will start from its `source` and proceed within the
`domain` of the least common ancestor between `source` and `target`.

        domain = source.common target

Conclusivity is enforced by checking each state that will be exited against the
`conclusive` attributes.

        s = source; until s is domain
          return null if s.attributes & CONCLUSIVE
          s = s.superstate

If a previously initiated transition is still underway, it needs to be notified
that it will not finish.

        transition?.abort()

Retrieve the appropriate transition expression for this origin/target pairing.
If none is defined, then an actionless default transition will be created and
applied, causing the callback to return immediately.

        @_transition = transition = new Transition target, source,
          @getTransitionExpression target, origin

Preparation for the transition begins by emitting a `depart` event on the
`source` state.

        eventArgs = [ transition, args ]
        source.emit 'depart', eventArgs
        @_transition = transition = null if transition.aborted

Enter into the transition state.

        if transition
          @_current = transition
          transition.emit 'enter', VIA_NONE
          @_transition = transition = null if transition.aborted

Walk up to the top of the domain, emitting `exit` events for each state along
the way.

        s = source; while transition and s isnt domain
          if s.attributes & RETAINED
            s._.retaineePath = transition.origin.path()
          s.emit 'exit', eventArgs
          transition.superstate = s = s.superstate
          @_transition = transition = null if transition.aborted

A callback will be invoked from `transition.end()` to conclude the transition.

        transition?.callback = ->
          transition = null if transition.aborted

Trace a path from `target` up to `domain`, then walk down it, emitting `enter`
events for each state along the way.

          if transition
            s = target; pathToState = []; while s isnt domain
              pathToState.push s
              s = s.superstate
          while transition and substate = pathToState.pop()
            transition.superstate = substate
            substate.emit 'enter', eventArgs
            transition = null if transition.aborted

Exit from the transition state.

          if transition
            transition.emit 'exit', VIA_NONE
            transition = null if transition.aborted

Terminate the transition with an `arrive` event on the targeted state.

          if transition
            @_current = target
            target.emit 'arrive', eventArgs

Any virtual states that were previously active may now be discarded.

            s = origin; while s.attributes & VIRTUAL
              ss = s.superstate
              do s.destroy
              s = ss

Now complete, the `Transition` instance can be discarded.

            do transition.destroy
            @_transition = transition = null

            options?.success?.call? this

            return target

          return null

At this point the transition is attached to the `domain` state and is ready to
proceed.

        return transition?.start.apply( transition, args ) or @_current



### [Forward imports](#root-state--forward-imports)

    StateExpression       = require './state-expression'
    Transition            = require './transition'
    TransitionExpression  = require './transition-expression'
